Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. This is one
of a series of videos on the foundations of
mathematics. Up till now, we've been talking
about arithmetic. Now we are going to enter
a new phase when we talk about the foundations
of geometry. Geometry is probably the biggest
subject in mathematics. It's historically
a very interesting and rich subject and one
whose foundations are notoriously difficult to
establish. One of the challenges with geometry
is that there are so many concepts from it which
are so familiar already to us in our daily life,
words that already have a pre-assigned meaning to
us from experience. So one of the challenges is
to come up with definitions, proper definitions
of many terms, such as what is a point, line,
plane, circle, triangle, square, continuum,
space, cube, curve, surface, distance, angle,
parallel, perpendicular, congruent, similar,
between, larger, smaller, straight, reflection,
rotation, translation, sphere, ellipse, conic,
ray, hemisphere, cone, area, volume. I probably
could go on with a few more pages of terms
that are generally quite familiar to most
people but need precise mathematical definitions
in order for geometry to make sense. In this list,
there are some that are much harder to establish
than others, and I've indicated those especially
hard ones with some underlines in red. Distance
is a problematic concept to take down concretely.
Angle is even more problematic and even more
difficult, as is the notion of curve and surface.
All of these are quite hard, in fact, and involve
a lot of advanced mathematics if you're going to
do them properly. And there's one term here which
is very, very difficult to establish correctly,
and that is the notion of the continuum. What do
we mean exactly by a straight line or continuum of
points? We would have to say a lot about that
and about the difficulties involved in that.
So let's now go from the words to some pictures
and show how you get the meanings of these words
from being shown lots of pictures in everyday
life. We learn the meanings of words by being
shown lots of examples; we rarely get official
formal definitions of things. So for example, to
learn what a point is, we've all been shown lots
of points, and after you see a number of them,
you should get the idea of what a point is. This
particular configuration of points, of course,
corresponds to stars, which is something that's
very important historically in terms of the
interests of our ancestors. Here are some examples
of lines. There's a circle, there are some
squares, there's another square. The orientation
of the square is not so crucial; it doesn't matter
how you rotate it, it's still a square. Here are
examples of triangles illustrating that there are
different possible approaches. Here we have a
triangle defined in terms of three lines, here
in terms of three points and three lines, here in
terms more of the area enclosed. Here are parallel
lines. You can just see them; you look at them,
you see sort of what the idea is. Here a notion
of perpendicular; if you see enough of them, you
get the idea of perpendicular without being told
precisely what it means. The problem with all this
is that pictures don't replace proper definitions.
When we come to do proofs, we need more precise
definitions to base everything on. That's going
to be a very big challenge: replacing intuitive
everyday understandings of things with formal,
precise mathematical definitions. And another
question related is how does one specify
geometric objects? For example, let's say I take
this triangle here, and I want to pass on the
information about this triangle to you. If I can't
show you a picture, suppose I have to write you a
letter or an email, and I want to express this
triangle. How do I do it efficiently? In other
words, what kind of information is required
to specify a geometrical object? That's going
to be an important question because it's very
directly connected with the idea of a definition.
This general approach of pictures on an empty
page is not one that we are going to pursue all
that much. We are going to look at a rather
more structured approach to geometry which
makes definitions much simpler to frame. In
our approach to the foundations of geometry,
we're going to rely a lot on a fabulous
technological innovation of modern times,
namely a sheet of graph paper. A sheet of
graph paper is indispensable for school
work in geometry. That's going to be a point I'm
going to emphasize over and over again. And it's
also indispensable for setting up definitions in
geometry and connecting to a lot of the modern
digital world. So here's a piece of graph paper:
lines horizontal and vertical, and on it, we can
illustrate many geometrical concepts. For example,
a point can now be specified by its coordinates,
in this case, for this point, 10, 3. And so we can
end up defining points in terms of coordinates,
which is something that we're going to do. If
we look at a line, a line can now be defined
in terms of the pattern of the points that are on
it. For example, this line here is determined by
the fact that we're going over one, up two to
go from point to point on it. We can make the
notion of perpendicularity and parallelism much
clearer by the use of coordinates. This line is
parallel to this one because this one also goes
over one and up two from step to step. And this
line and this line are perpendicular because
the one over and two up here are balanced with
a one up and two over for this line. So this is
a framework that ties down the plane very rigidly
and makes sure that we are really working on a
plane and not rather on the surface of a sphere
or some other curved surface. It's a great aid
for connecting arithmetic and geometry. It allows
us accurate specification of geometrical objects.
It naturally applies to the world of graphics and
digital design, and it's an accurate basis for
measurement and gives us natural definitions.
So now, with that general introduction, we need
to get a little bit more specific. We're going
to have to go back in time to history, to the
most important mathematical book ever written,
that's Euclid's Elements. Every treatment
of geometry, whether ancient or modern,
must start with an understanding of Euclid's
accomplishments and some of his difficulties.
That's what we're gonna do next time. I hope
you're gonna join me. I'm Norman Wildberger.